Louise, welcome back to the Health Select Committee. I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm chairing this morning. As you can see, we've got the members around the
table. I think you probably understand the way this
operates. We have been given a copy of the
draft member's bill. We have allocated 10 minutes for
your submission, so I'll hand the time over to you now.
Thank you. Tena koutou. My name is Louise Duffy, and I want
to thank you for the opportunity to speak to you all again.
Last time I was here, I went through the reasons why New Zealand's advance
directive system needs to be reviewed and a more effective system put in
place. This came from a personal experience when my mum's
directive wasn't followed by doctors or the hospital system after a
major stroke.
To recap, an advance directive is a document you make that tells medical
teams what treatment you do or don't want if, in the future,
you can't communicate decisions for yourself.
Medical systems focus on keeping people alive, so almost all
directives are made by people who choose not to have medical intervention
so that they can pass naturally.
Despite directives having legal standing in New Zealand, they're not always
followed. Research has shown unclear or invalid directives
and medical teams being unaware of or not following directives are
key reasons for this.
After I last presented, this committee recommended urgent reform
of the directive system. In particular, the committee endorsed three
things: establishing a nationwide register for advance
directives, that the Health Quality and Safety Commission update the
current directive template to have an outcome focus with simple
descriptions of treatments and life-sustaining options,
that a review system be established to help provide certainty for medical
personnel that directives are current and valid.
Based on the Health Select Committee's direction, the Parliamentary Counsel
Office and Russell McVeagh have worked on a draft Advance Directives
Bill to create an effective framework for directives.
The draft bill would do several key things.
Firstly, it establishes a process for making valid written
advance directives. This includes confirming the person has
capacity to make a directive, that the directive is made
voluntarily, and that it is signed and witnessed by someone
authorized to certify the person's capacity.
Secondly, it would establish a national register of advance directives
overseen by a registrar, so health practitioners could access
directives as and when needed. Within this, the
bill sets out the processes for registering, amending, and
removing directives. It also creates a review system to
ensure registered directives are up to date.
If a directive on the register is not reviewed, it would lapse
unless the person who made it lacks capacity at the time of the
review and the directive reflects their earlier informed wishes.
Thirdly, the bill would require practitioners to take reasonable steps to
assess capacity and identify and follow any registered advance
directive, subject to limited exceptions where there are
reasonable grounds to depart from it.
Health practitioners would be required to report when a registered directive is
followed or not followed. If it is not followed, the reasons would
need to be recorded.
Within this, the bill allows a conscientious objection by
practitioners and provides privacy safeguards and protections for
practitioners acting in good faith or in emergencies, with the
Family Court to oversee any disputes.
Lastly, the bill would also amend the Protection of Personal and Property
Rights Act 1988 to require attorneys and welfare
guardians to identify, and where practicable, comply with
a registered advance directive.
The Law Commission recently identified there's ongoing uncertainty about
the requirements for a valid advance directive and when
health practitioners are required to give effect to one.
The commission suggests that clear statutory codification is needed
to address these issues.
The draft bill establishes the necessary legal framework for advance directives
in the New Zealand health system and would align us with jurisdictions such
as Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom.
Having this legislation enacted would ensure there's a system that gives health
practitioners greater certainty when difficult decisions need to be
made and reassures people that their lawful treatment decisions
will be recognized, accessible, and acted on.
Last year, after the committee's recommendations, Health Minister Simeon
Brown said officials had been asked to provide advice on setting up a
nationwide register for advance directives and added that the
government is committed to ensuring the healthcare wishes of New Zealanders are
respected.
The Deputy Prime Minister, David Seymour, also recognized that a stronger,
clearer system would help doctors make decisions about directives,
noting there is confusion about the authority of a person's advance directive at
exactly the point when it needs to be usedLabour
health spokesperson and member of this committee, Ayesha Verrall,
has also noted that an IT component must be part of the
system, and that while practical, current approaches such as
putting someone's wishes on their fridge are not always effective.
She also added that the understandable bias of health workers to
keep people alive can conflict with patient autonomy.
The draft bill builds directly on the health committee's recommendations.
It provides a practical legal framework for validity,
visibility, review, practitioner certainty, and
accountability.
As such, I'd like to ask the committee to do three things.
Build on this bipartisan support and recommend the Draft Advance Directives
Bill be introduced to the House by the Minister of Health or one of the
Associate Ministers of Health.
If the government does not introduce it, I ask members of this committee
or members of your parties who support this reform to introduce this
as a private member's bill.
And more broadly, I ask for your personal support for this draft bill
and for you to consider gaining support within your party to enact it.
My mum had a right to make an advance directive.
She had a right for that directive to be recognized and followed.
This bill gives practical effect to that right for New Zealanders.
I'd welcome a chance to discuss anything about the draft bill or any other matters
members of the committee would like addressed. Ngā mihi.
Thank you for your time and your support.
Yes. Thank you, Louise. A lot of work has gone into this.
Thank you.
Thank you. Two questions.
Yeah.
First of all, thank you for the work that you've shown what can be achieved by one
individual who's on a mission to change the law.
So thank you for all of that. My questions are, the
interface between this and the new Mental Health Bill, have you had
a chance to consider what this could mean for that? You may or may not have.
The second one is probably more complex, how this interplays with the
End of Life Choice Bill and some of the criticisms around end
of life where people
who may not be in a state to make decisions, that might be a time when an advance
directive might be helpful. What are the considerations you've given to those
two? So there's two things. And the draft bill quite specifically says
that the mental health advance directives are treated completely
separately, and that they'll be treated by the provisions of the relevant act.
With the second one, with the End of Life Choice,
I think that's a wider debate.
My personal position would be that people can make the choice when they're
competent to do so. Within that, I think more consideration
would need to be given by wider bodies with more input into what does that
look like at particular points, but-
Thank you. Right.
Thank you so much, Louise, for continuing this important work.
It's good to see you again. The
first two parts of the bill appear to me
to explain how we should
implement good practice around this.
Yeah.
The part about review is where I have my questions.
How would it come to pass that
not following an advance directive is
drawing the
attention of authorities, and how would a
finding of an offense
of not following the advance directive be made?
I have the same questions. I think with this, the bill sets up the framework, and
there's going to be things like how is it you just get integrated into the
nationwide system, and that falls out in operation.
Yeah.
So I think that that is a layer down from this bill.
The bill will say this, it's like the End of Life Choice Act.
It's going to say, "This is the system that we want to have followed." And
then it will be for the experts below that to say how best that would work
within the structures that are available
for that type of thing to happen.
If I could just provide some feedback that setting up a
new offense
that health practitioners may be subject to-
Yeah
...
supporters of this bill will need to have a, including myself-
Yes
... need to have an answer for that.
Right.
I'm not sure that I'm in a position to give that to you today, but I'm more than
happy to follow that up with you and try and find some detail.
Yeah, good.
I will say that I had asked the same question about that offense, and they
have said that the bar has been set very high.
They said, "Look, the offense is deliberately confined to willful failure to
comply,"
and that's a high threshold for liability.
So that only intentional or deliberate disregard of an advance directive will
attract sanction. It's specifically set like
that because they don't want to have good faith errors or people acting in
emergencies affected by this.
Yeah. Thank you. Cameron.
Louise,
thank you for shepherding this in the way.
In your experience with people about advance care
directives and this bill, do you feel that the public
who you've communicated with understand
the fragility or the confusion of the current system until they
actually have to deal with it? Do you think most people-
No
... assume this is already in place?
I think that as it stands at the moment, the
advance directive system is quite hard to access,
in terms of you can go to a doctor or a lawyer.
So that's actually a commitment of time and resources, particularly if you're
going to a lawyer. If you are trying to use the Health Quality & Safety
Commission template, as discussed previously,
you would have to have a certain degree of medical knowledge to be able to get
through that and do it so that it's effective
in a way that's legally applicable.
Yeah.
So within the system, I actually think there needs to
be changes both with the framework so that it's clear what
advance directives are, and then secondly, at a practical level, so people
think this is an effective system and it's easy to use.
And one of the things, again, is not covered in this bill is that the
template, which is something that this committee discussed last time
and suggested that the Health Quality & Safety Commission update,
needs to be simplified so that the system as a whole is understood
by people, is seen to be easy, and is seen to be effective.
Excellent. Thank you very much. We've gone a little bit over time.
But thank you very much, Louise, for coming in, and appreciate all the work that
you've put in to champion this bill.
Thank you.
So thank you very much.
We'll now move back to private session.